hey guys welcome back to the channel so
it's been more than 15 years since the
first saw movie came out and sequels and
reboots are still being released
it's clear that they're doing something
right now the saw films are not perfect
very far from it however and i think
most people would agree with me on this
there was something so uniquely
intriguing and captivating about the
first movie that none of the others
could replicate
so in this video we'll look at why the
original saw was so great
just as a quick recap the story follows
adam and dr lawrence gordon as they wake
up chained by their legs in a decrepit
dungeon
they have no idea where they are or why
they're here and on the floor in front
of them is a dead body
what's interesting to see here is that
the movie instantly starts off with an
extremely claustrophobic feel
everything is very close and almost
pushed directly in our face to build the
maximum amount of discomfort
this is very unusual when it comes to
most films we normally start off with
something that conveys the general
location so we know where we are
and who we're following but saw actively
goes against that and yes this is due to
its low budget and that they were only
able to shoot in a single location
however the director james 1 managed to
take this limitation and turn it into a
positive that gives the movie a
signature feel
everything is up close and most of the
time the actors are stuffed into the
frame
pushing at the borders having it so
tight really sounds the feeling that
they're trapped we eventually do get to
see things beyond the dungeon but it
does a great job of setting the initial
tone
and it might seem like i'm over
analyzing but let's compare this to the
opening of saw7 where two guys are in a
public square behind glass fighting over
a girl using sauce
now this moment doesn't quite have the
same impact as the first one
since we follow the people indoors as
well as the ones outside it feels much
more like we're in the crowd looking in
in contrast the original makes us feel
like we're a part of it
also as adam and laurence are introduced
we see that the camera
is very shaky and usually closer to adam
whereas it's much smoother on lawrence
indicating that he's perhaps the calmer
one among the two and making dr gordon a
surgeon hints at what we might see at
the end
but there's something more important
that the original does that none of the
other movies could ever replicate
and that is that we as the audience know
just as little if not less than adam and
laurence
again if we were to compare this to any
of the sequels it makes sense why they
can't raise the same level of mystery as
the first one by then we already know
what the deal is we can somewhat expect
what's going to happen in the next 90
minutes but in the first one we're
totally clueless
and as more hints are revealed that
indicate why they are here and how to
escape the movie invites us to solve the
mystery along with the two guys
that clock what about it it's brand new
so so somebody obviously wanted us to
know the time
anyways dr gordon eventually mentions
that he might know who put them here
then in a flashback we follow the
detectives tap and sing
as they arrive at a crime scene to see
the killer's last victim
during the sequence we see a man lying
on a bed of barbed wire
as increasingly more sinister details of
the case are revealed
all of this is intercut with what looks
like forensic photos what i think this
does so well
is it obviously shows the sadistic
nature of jigsaw with a really
entertaining trap
but the way we see it with the frequent
photos gives it much more of an
investigative feel this highlights that
it's not just about the killings but
also the mystery and hunt for jigsaw
the trap just makes it more intriguing
which heightens our interest in the
killer this is again something that the
other movies can't do
because there we already know who the
killer is since it's revealed
at the end of this one here we feel like
we're not only a part of adam and
laurence's game
but also of the police investigation to
find the killer also the smaller games
are only one of many tools used to make
it more mysterious and thrilling whereas
something like saw 4
seemingly leans on the traps to have a
movie in the first place
something else that might seem arbitrary
but works extremely well to set the tone
are the colors
almost everything looks washed out now
the scenes with the traps have a much
stronger green and we'll get to the
significance of that in a moment
but the rest of the movie looks quite
bleak actually bleak is an
understatement
everything looks dirty and borderline
disgusting and all of it's lit with
fluorescent light
it's uneasy and uninviting which is
exactly how we're supposed to feel
this was one of my problems with 2017's
jigsaw
that movie looked beautiful the lighting
looked awesome and natural and the
colors especially at the farm were super
saturated but it looked like a warm
comfortable barn that some people are
strolling through on a lazy sunday
afternoon
the only feelings i get from this
bathroom is that it's cold smelly and
wet
okay so by now you're probably screaming
at me to talk about the death traps but
i just think it's important to show that
this movie is more than just traps
something i may have not exactly helped
to spread but let's talk about them
as we get to know more about the killer
we see the increasingly bizarre games he
puts his victims through what's so
unique about this is that we begin to
fear the killer
even though we have no idea what he even
looks like we're afraid but we're not
sure of who
it's an eerie thought to picture
yourself in any one of these settings
forced to play some twisted game that
makes you hurt yourself to be free
arguably the most notorious one comes
when dr gordon is being questioned by
the police when they find one of his pen
lights at the crime scene they take him
down to the police station and make him
witness the testimony of amanda the only
known survivor of jigsaw's games
in a flashback she explains how she woke
up with this metal machine on her head
we then see the tv turn on and a puppet
starts explaining how she needs to get
the key to unlock her mask from another
person in the room
otherwise it will snap open and shall
die once again the level of tension and
discomfort are at their peak the creepy
puppet is practically shoved in our face
the technology looks shitty and the mask
is rusty all of this sells the
incredibly grimy feel
it looks homemade and realistic then
comes a really interesting shot when
amanda tries getting off the chair
now i know this sped up style would
eventually become a little bit overused
and it's not exactly subtle but i think
it's incredibly effective
in only a few seconds this hectic action
instantly conveys the feeling of the
adrenaline rush and time crunch that
amanda is
under we immediately understand what she
feels like just with the motion of the
camera alone
also the effect of circling amanda makes
it look like the room is spinning around
her
this gives a feeling of disorientation
and confusion which amanda is feeling
when she wakes up
so she gets off the chair and walks
towards the other guy as the time takes
away she begins stabbing him to get the
key from his organs
when it's unlocked the mask snaps open
and she narrowly avoids death
now while other movies center around
these kinds of death traps i think saw
does the best job of conveying the sense
of pressure
high stakes and time limit with a
meaningful use of motion
sound and editing but these traps do not
come without their flaws
they're incredibly unbalanced like why
do lawrence and amanda have to go
through such a big game compared to the
smaller tests for the others
and why do all the victims have to hurt
themselves yet amanda only has to kill
another person but the concept of these
games works enough that you can look
past it so at the end of amanda's trap
the billy puppet explains how most
people don't care enough about their
life
and neither did amanda by being a drug
addict but by completing this test she
now has a greater appreciation for life
and many people call out the problems
with the killer's philosophy that is
trying to teach people to value their
existence
and these motives don't really make a
lot of sense mainly because most of
jigsaw's victims don't end up having a
life to value afterwards but the movie
is not saying that jigsaw is correct
this is a trap i often fall into myself
just because a character in the movie
says something doesn't mean that the
film is trying to say that it's right
or that you should believe it in fact i
think there's a lot that hints towards
that jigsaw's logic
is messed up first of all the kidnappers
that put the people into the traps are
wearing pig masks
now that's not an animal that comes to
mind when i think of something scary but
it fits so well because it almost feels
like they're trying to tell us that the
kidnappers and by extension the killer
are pigs now when you call someone a pig
it's not very nice
in this case it might be implied that
the killers act like repulsive animals
this is further highlighted by the use
of unmotivated pig squeals when lawrence
and adam are kidnapped
martin scorsese actually used a similar
technique in raging ball
during a boxing fight there are sounds
of lions and elephants to highlight the
animalistic style of the fighters
and i think that's what this movie is
trying to do as well my interpretation
is that it uses pig noises to symbolize
the vile nature of jigsaw
and look i'm not trying to say that saw
is a masterpiece it's not but that
doesn't mean that there isn't some
meaning to what we're seeing
especially given both james wans and lee
wannell's track record in the horror
genre i think these guys are a little
too smart to just make some cheesy movie
that leans on shock value and the lone
plot device of death traps to sell it
and by the way as i mentioned earlier
the strongest colors in the movie are
the incredibly saturated greens during
their traps
this is a tone that most people would
associate with sickness and feeling ill
making it look like the traps themselves
are sick now you can say that the green
is only used because it looks cool
and you might be correct but that
doesn't explain why these are the only
parts of the movie with such intense
color with the exception of adam's photo
room but that has to be red
so i believe the tones are deliberately
chosen to stand out in this way
to have this effect on us that it looks
wrong there's even a moment when the
detectives find one of the people who's
about to fight for his life in a trap
they break into the killer's lair and
everything looks normal
however when jigsaw arrives activates
the machine and the police try to get
him out the scene takes on a subtle
green heel
the location didn't change yet the
colors turn green right when the trap is
active
so while many people criticize saw for
wanting to justify the murders with some
twisted morals it seems like the movie
itself
is trying to get you to be repulsed by
the killer's actions
not to sympathize with him or make him
look like a good guy the deaths cannot
be justified and they shouldn't be
the people that are kidnapped they're
not saints but they don't deserve to die
however this is one of the few parts of
the movie that doesn't need to make
sense for this i'd like to reference one
of my favorite games of
all time alan wake stephen king once
wrote that nightmares exist
outside of logic and there's little fun
to be had in explanations
in a horror story the victim keeps
asking why
but there can be no explanation and
there shouldn't be one
the unanswered mystery is what stays
with us the longest
in a horror movie the victim shouldn't
deserve to die but that's what makes it
scary
it means that everyone even you can be a
target it might become clear by showing
an example
from a different song movie in the
sequels the writers try to humanize the
killer by revealing that he lost his son
in saw 5 it's shown that a man named
cesar killed his child and a robbery
gone wrong
so he gets kidnapped and put into a trap
where his face is cut by a bunch of
knives
but during this sequence it's unlikely
that you have any sympathy for seesaw
he's a jerk a
criminal and killer himself so when he
dies it doesn't carry as much emotional
weight as when someone who doesn't
deserve it does
when they're innocent we tend to root
for them that's why jigsaw's victims
shouldn't be the worst people in the
world if that were the case we won't
care for the characters
anyway while saw is known for its
violence it surprisingly has some pretty
unique ways of scaring the audience
even the jump scares have a very
creative execution that still holds up
more than a decade later
and some of the scary moments are
unrecognizable if you rewatch them
it seems so much unlike what you'd
expect from a saw film
for example there's a flashback to where
laurence's daughter wakes up at night
and goes to her mom
she explains how there's a man in her
room and she's scared when lawrence
takes her back to bed we think it was
just a nightmare or she's making it up
as the room is empty
however when she's alone again we see
that someone's watching from the closet
this moment would be unthinkable in any
other sequels
since she's a young child we dismiss her
making us think that there's no one
there
this strengthens the moment when we're
wrong this shows the diverse nature of
the movie
it doesn't rely on jump scares and death
traps but it shows that much of the
movie's fear
doesn't come from loud noises or violent
kills but instead from the fear of being
followed when you thought you were alone
there's also another great moment when
adam gets kidnapped we see that he's in
his apartment when the lights suddenly
go out
adam then begins hearing footsteps
nearby eager to see who's out there he
tries looking for the person
unfortunately his flashlight doesn't
work so he takes one of his cameras and
uses the flash to illuminate the room
eventually he opens a closet and gets
attacked i think this sequence
demonstrates how skilled the filmmakers
were
they understood how to carefully raise
and release tension in a way that builds
anxiety
the jump scare itself while they're more
or less the same throughout horror
movies but it's the scene that leads up
to it that makes it unique
here we follow adam in an
over-the-shoulder shot that almost makes
it look like a video game
we're right behind him we're right with
him this puts us in the forefront of the
action
so when the masked man jumps out it
doesn't just jump at adam but towards us
as well
and the moments before adam gets
kidnapped trying to get us comfortable
following him which immerses us in the
scene
we can compare this to a similar scene
in saw 5 where peter strom gets taken
in my opinion this scene isn't quite as
effective we spend a lot of time looking
at strum head
on in this sequence so when he gets
attacked it feels more like we're
spectating the events rather than being
in them that's why saw 5 has to
compensate for that with this insert
shot of the pig mask but the scary
moments in saw 1
they're not just good for a saw movie
they're good in a general horror sense
now the pacing of saw is also
surprisingly fast even though there are
countless limitations
most of the time we're just stuck in
this bathroom however something that
gives it momentum and makes it feel
alive
are the small puzzles and obstacles the
two encounter when adam and laurence
wake up they find a tape in their
pockets
once dr gordon plays his the last few
seconds of the tape are what stand out
at the very end he hears someone
whispering follow your heart this needs
them to dig through a toilet where adam
finds a bag with saws
he gives one to lawrence and keeps the
other for himself
however there's something else in there
that he tries hiding from him
there are always questions that are set
up and for every puzzle that's solved
they only get more increasingly ominous
clues
for example in one of his pockets
lawrence finds a key
but it's not for either of their chains
nor is it for the door
later they use it on a small box but in
it they only find two cigarettes and a
lighter among other things
the mystery just keeps getting weirder
and more complex
that's really the most interesting part
of the movie so towards the end the
story spirals out of control and
lawrence ends up sawing off his own leg
in a makeshift amputation to escape and
get back to his family
when he's gone it's revealed that the
killer was in the room the whole time
it's the man who we thought was dead
this twist works so well because
almost everything that happens at the
end was set up in the beginning like it
should be
one of the officers mentions that jigsaw
likes a front-row seat to his own games
19 minutes in
there was someone standing outside here
watching through this people
looks like our friend jigsaw likes to
book himself front row seats to his own
sick little games
and arguably most importantly the song
which lawrence uses to free himself
is revealed by the 14 minute mark there
are plenty more things that are hinted
to at the beginning that pay off later
like a bullet gun and toilet lid to name
a few but i'm not trying to run through
the entire story
almost everything the movie gives us at
the start is very deliberate and becomes
an important story bending element later
on
this shows that saw is not just some
schlocky gorefest that we often see it
being criticized as
leewano's writing actually demonstrates
skill in this aspect the movie doesn't
just pull random stuff out of its ass
because someone thought it might bake
for a cool moment
but it's well thought out now don't get
me wrong as a whole saw is an experience
that's incredibly in your face
but there are plenty of aspects that are
respectable and finally the last shot of
the movie is jon slamming the
sliding door shot leaving adam to die
this is eerily reminiscent of the iconic
door slam in the texas chainsaw massacre
from 1974.
so one thing that saw probably suffers
most from is its notorious reputation
for being
incredibly violent and bloody but that's
not really the case at all
yes there are a couple of pictures of
wounded people but the only crazy gory
moment is a quick insert shot where
amanda digs through another man's organs
for a key
the rest is all off screen and basically
just implied
sadly the sequels will play very heavily
into this controversy and go so far over
the top with its violence
that they well deserve that notoriety
but if you were to judge saw on violence
alone
the first movie would be much closer to
something like 7 than its own sequels
at the end of the day i believe that saw
is a film that has plenty of
restrictions but it's executed in a way
that plays heavily into the strengths
while effectively minimizing its
weaknesses and even creatively turning
the limitations into advantages
alright guys those were some of my
thoughts on saw one this was maybe two
percent of what i would like to have
said but otherwise the video would be
way too long
so i hope you enjoyed it thank you so
much for watching bye guys